# Analysis-for-predicting-disease-spread
## DengAI: Predicting Disease Spread 
### Team Members:
<i>Ami Doshi, Shuying Zhao, Tian Xu</i> <br> <br>

### Project Idea <br>
Dengue fever is an epidemic spreading in tropical and subtropical areas. The symptoms of Dengue fever in mild cases are fever, rash, and muscle with joint pain which is similar as the flu. However, the server cases of this disease would cause severe bleeding, low blood pressure, and even death. There are not any vaccines to prevent it. The only thing that we can do is to avoid mosquito bites because the disease is carried by mosquitoes. In this case, temperature and precipitation could be significant factors to influence Dengue fever spread. In this dataset, it includes the information of locations (San Juan and Iquitos), time, temperature, humidity, precipitation and vegetation. We’d like to analyze the dataset and predict the number of disease cases happening each week and how the climate change influences the disease spread in the two representative cities along with the time. <br>
The analysis will help people to understand more about the disease which still can’t be eliminated worldwide. The prediction result could contribute to the public health area to help public health workers and people deploying better methods and facilities to prevent or cure Dengue Fever. Also, if we can accurately predict the total cases every week, the related public health departments can generate a more accurate strategy and plan in terms of preventing the disease.
<br>
### Data Attributes
There are five categories of columns in the datasets containing City and date indicators, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA)'s GHCN daily climate data weather station measurements, PERSIANN satellite precipitation measurements, NOAA's National Centers for Environmental Prediction(NCEP) Climate Forecast System Reanalysis measurements and Satellite vegetation. We would explain each variables in the following paragraphs to have a clear view of the whole datasets. <br>
* The first column category contains four columns which are city (only contain two cities, San Juan and Iquitos), year (1990 to 2010), weekofyear (1-53), week_start_date.
* The second column category NOAA's GHCN daily climate data weather station measurements contains station_max_temp_c which is the maximum temperature, station_min_temp_c which is the minimum temperature, station_avg_temp_c which is the average temperature, station_precip_mm which is the total precipitation, station_diur_temp_rng_c which is the diurnal temperature range.
* The third one is PERSIANN satellite precipitation measurements including precipitation_amt_mm which is the total precipitation with the range in 0-390.6mm.
* The next variables category is NOAA's National Centers for Environmental Prediction(NCEP) Climate Forecast System Reanalysis measurements which has the majority variables. It contains reanalysis_sat_precip_amt_mm which is the total precipitation, reanalysis_dew_point_temp_k which is the mean dew point temperature, reanalysis_air_temp_k which is the mean air temperature, reanalysis_relative_humidity_percent which is the mean relative humidity, reanalysis_specific_humidity_g_per_kg which is the mean specific humidity, reanalysis_precip_amt_kg_per_m2 which is the total precipitation, reanalysis_max_air_temp_k which is the maximum air temperature, reanalysis_min_air_temp_k which is the minimum air temperature, reanalysis_avg_temp_k which is the average air temperature, and reanalysis_tdtr_k which is the diurnal temperature range. 
* The last category would be satellite vegetation which is the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) - NOAA's CDR Normalized Difference Vegetation Index. It has ndvi_se which is Pixel southeast of city centroid, ndvi_sw which is Pixel southwest of city centroid, ndvi_ne which is Pixel northeast of city centroid and ndvi_nw which is Pixel northwest of city centroid. We found that when values at Pixel southeast of city centroid are blanks, the remaining three pixel centroids are also blank.

### Data Preparation and algorithms 
We went through both train and test datasets and found that both datasets have missing values which is really large part to affect the results. We decided to put the latest values in the temperature, humidity and precipitation columns because of these values would not change a lot in the same location at the same year. For the vegetation columns, we decided to keep the latest value to replace these missing values because vegetation would change based on previous situation. <br> <br>
With the year and week of year columns, we first considered to use time series to analysis the data to prediction about the future cases of Dengue fever that would have in these two cities. For the datasets, we decided to use the hold-on-method to do sampling. We also would try to use several algorithms to work on the dataset to predict the disease. First, we thought about the association rule mining to find the co-occur relationship between the higher number of disease cases and other attributes after classified these numeric attributes. At the same time, we also can try decision tree and k means to see which would be better to find the reason why there is higher or lower cases of this disease. As we just talked about the SVM model in the last class, we believed that SVM model would be precious to predict the cases of the disease because it can work both linearly separable and linearly non-separable cases. After working on these algorithms, we also would compare the performances to decide which is the best model that we would use in the report. 
<br><br>
<u>References:</u> <br> 
Competion hosted by DrivenData https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/44/dengai-predicting-disease-spread/